G54CCS Lab Exercises: Google App Engine (Python)
================================================

These exercises will take you through the basics of building simple
cloud-hosted applications using the Python programming language on
Google's App Engine (GAE) platform.  They can all be carried out using
the local development server provided as part of the GAE development
environment.  If you wish to try running them live on GAE you will
need to sign up for a Google account on GAE by following the
instructions at <http://appspot.com/>. 

Lab Exercises
-------------

Note that these labs are **not** intended to turn you into expert
Python or GAE developers!  They are intended to give you insight into
the process and problems associated with developing applications for
the cloud.  You will need to create a new application for each, and
enter the code associated with each lab.  You should also then attempt
any questions/further exercises that are embedded within each lab. 

### [Hello World](http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~mdf/g54ccs/g54ccs_lab01.pdf)

A simple static "Hello World" page as a GAE application. 

### [Some Python](http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~rmm/teaching/2011-g54ccs/labs/02-python.pdf)

An extension of the first lab to create a more dynamic webpage, and to
demonstrate more examples of Python syntax.

Common Problems
---------------

As this is the first time this module and these labs have been run, I
will collate commonly encountered problems here.  Here are what I have
so far...

### Indentation

In Python, _indentation matters_!  Python uses indentation to indicate
_block structure_, i.e., which lines of code go together to make up a
function or other unit.  This is in contrast to languages such as
Java, C#, C/C++, which all use curly brackets (`{`,`}`) to do this.

Thus you **must** make sure you have your code correctly indented,
otherwise it will not behave the way you expect.  Pay particular
attention if you use different editors as some use tab characters,
some use spaces, and so you can confuse things.  If in doubt, use the
space bar to insert spaces to indent your code.

### Application Names

The GAE development server does not support application names
containing UPPER CASE LETTERS.

### SDK Location

If you must install the SDK yourself, install it to `C:` not your
network-mounted home directory.  If you install it on your
network-mounted home directory, it will take 15 minutes or more to
install, and everything will run very slowly. 

### Proxy Configuration

Computers within the School are configured to use the School's proxy.
If your machine has _not_ had an exemption for `localhost` setup, then
your browser will attempt to access `localhost` via the proxy, which
will fail.  

If this happens, simply use the IP address that corresponds to
`localhost`, i.e., replace `localhost` with `127.0.0.1`.

### Preferred Browser

We recommend using Firefox rather than Internet Explorer on the
School's computers, as Internet Explorer hides error messages from
you making it much harder to debug your code.

### Boilerplate

If you create your application through the GAE launcher, the created
application will contain some boilerplate code generated by the
launcher.  _Pay attention to this code too_!  It must match what is
shown in the exercise you are doing -- if it does not, you must edit
it appropriately.

In general, assume that **all* code in your programme is
**significant**, unless commented out.
               
### Debugging

The _Console Log_ is very useful while debugging.  If you run your
application manually from a Command Prompt, then you will get this by
default.  If you run your application from within the GAE Launcher,
then you will need to explicitly request to see the console log by
hitting `CTRL-L` or clicking on the "Logs" button.

